Christy Hyman
Advanced Digital Humanities Topics
Dr. Adrian Wisnicki
10/10/16	
The digital project is a tool that enhances the journey of humanities study. It is the product of a scholar’s inquiry and it represents the sum total of content that engages a certain critical discourse. Indeed digital humanities projects matter- they matter in large part because the web has ushered in new learning modes which call for innovation in the way scholarly material engages presumptive users. There is much digital scholarly content out there; how then do users recognize what is useful? How do they determine if a digital project has met their informational needs? For many, the question is simple: did it instruct the inquiry sought? If so the digital project satisfied the informational need then. For digital humanists however, the question is not so simple- an array of variables arise as scholars build their projects in ways that not only provide access at a distance, but also revitalizes the humanities in some way, promulgates further inquiry, and examines materials at a scale that might not be available otherwise. Additionally digital projects must support a universal design model that increases accessibility of differently abled populations. If a digital project manages to capture all these elements one can make a case that supports the project as optimal.Ultimately taking these steps will contribute to the potential of making an excellent digital humanities project.
	Revitalizing the humanities may sound a bit utopian and idealistic, yet the need for revitalization is necessary. The humanities as a discipline has been experiencing a number of setbacks in the last few years including shrinking enrollment numbers with regard to undergraduate majors as well as decreased funding allocation for departments  The New Republic reported  that “universities…have come to value …those programs that can generate revenue through alumni donations, external grants, or tuition. Under this new business model, humanities programs suffer in general and small departments, like classics and philosophy [history], and find themselves under threat...”  Of course the programs that do generate the external grants like those in the STEM fields seem to be progressing well.  Precollege outreach programs like Pathways to the Future Camp, Science Saturdays, as well as NASA funded opportunities are cropping up at every turn to pull students into lucrative careers in STEM. Additionally articles with titles such as “Highest Paying College Majors” also herald the push toward STEM. For particularly vulnerable populations who have historically experienced economic disadvantages these fields offer the highest promise for upward mobility. How then can the humanities compete and attract students as well as engage scholars toward its humanistic offerings? In revitalizing the humanities it becomes necessary to ask new questions, interrogate the teleological assumption of abundance in the archive, recover subaltern pasts, and overall reimagining of old methods.  In doing these things fresh approaches unfold as the discipline as a whole is invigorated with scholarly interest. Students and scholars alike find new purpose in the humanities field. These new questions coupled with the innovation in toolmaking within the digital invite a wealth of promise to revitalize the humanities.
	Promulgating further inquiry is another key element of a great digital humanities project. As mentioned previously the questions asked create a multitude of opportunity for generating new knowledge within the humanities. If a project provides access to content, it is a good thing for sure…but for a digital project to engage users in ways that compel new insights that expand their respective field that is even better. Using a Scalar platform, Matthew Delmont’s Black Quotidian digital project is a great example of how a site may feature historical content recovery on a segment of subaltern pasts. These newspaper articles also provide a pathway for understanding black history and culture in the twentieth century. Such a project call attention to historical actors that are mostly seen as objects in textbooks, documentaries, or Black History Month celebrations, while also casting new light on well-known black history subjects.  
In a similar vein of recovery Nishani Frazier’s Harambee City digital project utilizes the OMEKA platform to display a digital collection of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) an organization founded in Chicago in 1942 with principal aims for interracial cooperation and minority uplift. As principal investigator Frazier’s digital project emphasizes open access, public viewing, interactive conversation, and project participation. One of the most striking resources of Harambee City is the community organizing training module. After users acquaint themselves with the history of the CORE they themselves can participate in a community organizing training module:
LESSON PLAN ONE - INTERACTIVE STRATEGIZING FOR ECONOMIC EQUALITY
You are now the leader of CORE’s local chapter in Cleveland, Ohio.  Large company employers departed from the city beginning in the 1950s.  Cleveland now has no economic foundation.  The city is emblematic of a national phenomena of urban decline.  Black unemployment is extremely high due to discrimination in education and hiring.  Housing is poor and overcrowded.  City services, like trash pick up, are few or sporadic. 
Unlike some cities, the community in Cleveland has some hope!  The black community became politically successful when your chapter conducted voter registration which assisted the election of Carl Stokes, the first black mayor of an urban municipality.  Perhaps political transformation can lead to economic change.
Meanwhile, the National CORE office insists that protest is not useful for black economic freedom and black politicians can’t help the poor without community activism.  They decided to create an organization for economic development.  Do you agree with this strategy change?
YES!– I agree with National CORE’s decision to go in a different direction.  CORE should now focus on economic development in the black community
NO!  CORE must continue its original tactic.  CORE should continue direct action protest and focus on social injustice.
NEITHER!  I believe we should incorporate both strategies simultaneoiusly. 
Such an exercise holds great relevance within the academy as well as in the community. Students and scholars can engage in what it takes to effect change for social justice. Frazier built the training module content in such a way that depending on the answer, they are lead into a series of considerations for next steps- This is what follows from a “yes” response:
Great! You want to substantially change the economic condition of the poor! However, transforming an abandoned city facing financial decay requires extensive service. You must now select at least a few members to work full time on economic development compared to your original request for volunteers to attend meetings or a protest. Massive funding will be essential, but previous fundraising strategies will not work for this new policy. Initially, CORE used protests to expose discrimination and engender sympathy to elicit individual donations. However, small contributions are unreliable and too small to sustain an organization that wants to rebuild a city.
National CORE decides only foundation and government grants can back such an entity. Carl Stokes can provide some resources through CLEVELAND NOW!, a public and private funding program designed to revitalize the city. You also believe that Cleveland Foundation can support CORE’s endeavors as well.
YES! - I agree with this approach.  We must have funds to make broad change.
NO! - Opposition members persuade you not to accept external aid. You decide to try another method for economic development.
Frazier’s project does an excellent job of promulgating further inquiry in the form of  possibilities within historical study and interventions with social justice issues. Following on Jessica Marie Johnson’s call to action on the urgency for the digital humanities to engage with society’s “marginalized or discriminated against” both these projects fulfill many imperatives needed within the digital humanities by examining historical material at a scale not seen elsewhere.
	The digital humanities' potential scale of reaching audiences increases with the incorporation of universal design. George Williams reminds that in order to expand the availability of access we must broaden our understanding of the ways in which people use digital resources.  Universal design is “the concept of designing all products and the built environment to be aesthetic and usable to the greatest extent possible by everyone, regardless of their age, ability, or status in life” (“Ronald L. Mace”).  Such guiding principles create standards that strengthen all digital projects. The resources available at Web Accessibility Initiative site help digital humanist plan projects that consider universal design principles as they progress in building content.
	
	


